Grantee: Shelby County, TN  

Grant: B-13-US-47-0002 January 1, 2018 thru March 31, 2018 Performance Report  

Obligation Date:  

Grant Number: B-13-US-47-0002  

# Award Date:  

Contract End Date:  

Grantee Name: Shelby County, TN  

Review by HUD: Reviewed and Approved  

Grant Award Amount: \$60,445,163.00  

Grant Status: Active  

QPR Contact: Alfred Garrett  

LOCCS Authorized Amount: $\$60,445,163.00$  

Estimated PI/RL Funds: $\$000$  

Total Budget: \$60,445,163.00  

Disasters: Declaration Number No Disasters Found  

# Narratives  

# Executive Summary:  

Utilizing URN identified in Phase 1 of the NDR Competition and additional refined data compiled during Phase 2 of the NDR Competition, Shelby County will expend a total of \$60,445,163.00 in CDBG-NDR funds in Phase 3 of the NDR application to implement and develop longterm resilience strategies to fortify the county against future floods by “MAKING ROOM FOR THE RIVER” within Shelby County and the Region. Copies of the NDR application documents can be found at www.resilientshelby.com Also, as described in the NDR Phase 2 application, both Memphis and Shelby County are committed to carrying out Fair Housing activities.  Shelby County’s Department of Housing, a partner team member in the NDR application, is the County agency operating HUD Community Planning and Development (CPD) entitlement grants and oversees housing programs which directly impact LMI residents which include infrastructure development, housing rehabilitation/construction, down payment assistance, lead-based paint hazard reduction, CDBG Disaster Recovery activities, and fair housing counseling.  Likewise, the City of Memphis, a partner in the NDR application operates similar activities through its Division of Housing and Community Development.  Both agencies are currently working to promote Fair Housing and Fair Housing Initiatives under their Fair Housing Assessments.  Additionally, as part of the GREENPRINT, the Memphis Shelby County Office of Sustainability completed a Fair Housing Equity Assessment (FHEA) in partnership SCDH, HCD, community and business leaders and other housing partners and addressed fair housing impediments under the Greenprint and recommended various solutions to improve fair housing education and compliance.   Under the NDR grant, Shelby County will continue to promote and further Fair Housing utilizing the Shelby County Department of Housing, Memphis HCD, and the Greenprint’s FHEA to further assess Fair Housing impediments and incorporate Fair Housing initiatives into the NDR Resiliency Plan and the NDR projects in North (Big Creek), Central (Wolf River Greenway), and South (Cypress Creek) Shelby County.  Currently, efforts are underway by Memphis and Shelby County to develop a new AFH Plan under new Fair Housing guidelines by 2018 to more effectively carryout Fair Housing initiatives on a joint/countywide basis in order to more efficiently address fair housing issue.  The NDR administrative staff will work directly with SCDH, HCD, the Office of Sustainability to insure that Fair Housing is a key component of the NDR Resiliency Plan, long term resiliency efforts, and the long range Greenprint 2040 (which was the base platform for the NDR application in Phase 1 and Phase 2).  The NDR team understands that long term resiliency, social, economic, and environmental issues are a part of any long term Fair Housing Initiatives.  Through the activities of the NDR grant; and both Memphis and Shelby County’s HUD funded grants (CDBG, HOME, Lead Hazard Control, etc.) Shelby County will insure that fair housing is a central part of long term resilience efforts resulting from NDR efforts and projects.   NDR activities will focus on three geographical areas (one in each of the local watersheds) and the development of a Regional Resilience Plan to create a framework for resilience to provide detailed guidance for future rallow Shelby County to focusncreating a  

# Executive Summary:  

resilient community both locally and regionally. All four of the NDR funded actions utilize 4 guiding values to guide each activity. Specifically, these values are: (1) People (Health & Well Being) - protect lives, improve quality of life and promote social cohesion, accomplished through creation of wetlands and other flood storage to protect communities and create green assets; (2) Organization (Economy & Society) - reduce community burden of vacancy and vulnerable housing by removing resid  

# MID-URN Areas:  

After a complete evaluation of Unmet Recovery Needs (URNs) in Phase 1, Shelby County developed a set of four (4) activities designed to protect Shelby County’s communities from natural hazards while increasing environmental, economic and social opportunity for all residents of the region, especially vulnerable communities. In Phase 2, the County identified three target areas that were hardest hit by the 2011 disasters: along Big Creek (Northern Shelby County), the Wolf River (Central Shelby County),  

and South Cypress Creek (Southern Shelby County). Activities within these areas will create additional greenway trails and enhanced recreation areas as well as areas fo local food production. A fourth activity will create Regional Resilience Plan (which includes a hydraulic study of the of the thre and other similar efforts to the GREENPRINT, which wa Gra t. Each of these activities will lead to replicable oal of each activity was to ensure that the nmental, etc.) and ensure tha . Activity 1: Big Creek Wetland entage of LMI hous ns an area within the City arkway and Big Creek acts: 0201.02 Block Grou up 4 0202.21 Block Grou p 3 0204.00 Block Grou $\$5$ f Millington. Using a flood control along the creek to allow floo ill prevent future flooding in adjac oding in the Millington area would not have $\$4.5$ May 2010 floods, $\$79$ million of property dama as, with native vegetation, wetlands, and other natura l fe re, ball fields, lakes, and camping areas to provide increased recreational and entrepreneial oportunities. While creating the new floodplain will require the removal of trees to improve water conveyan  

# MID-URN Areas:  

ce, a tree canopy plan will be implemented to offset tree removal by four-to-one. Shelby County, the City of Millington, and other jurisdictions will work together to set aside approximately 500 acres for tree mitigation. Some of these areas will be utilized to provide an educational experience for school children from LMI areas. Tree mitigation areas will also provide a cooling effect by expanding the tree canopy to counter the increasing heat-island effect. Construction of this activity will incre  

# Key Agencies, Partners, Positions, Personnel:  

ithin the South Cypress Creek community to create a stronger and healthier neighborhood.  

10. A resource to Shelby County since Phase 1, and a partner in the development of Phase 2, the University of Memphis Center for Applied Earth Science and Engineering Research (CAESER) will continue its role in assisting Shelby County in it resilience efforts through the Hydraulic study portion of the Resilience Plan. CAESAR will continue to provide assistance to Shelby County through its applied research, education, and leadership in sustaining community ground water resources, analysis and creation of GIS databases, and tools designed to anticipate and provide solutions to reduce the effect of risk when a flooding occurs.  

11. Chickasaw Basin Authority (CBA), also a partner in Phase 3, was created as a State of Tennessee Agency as the Regional Development Authority for the Chickasaw Basin in Tennessee. The CBA develops flood control projects in the Loosahatchie and Wolf Rivers and Nonconnah Creek watersheds. The CBA is authorized by the State of Tenne TCA 64-1-201. Its role under Phase 3 will be to assist Shelby County and other partners in ecurin l for wetland restoration activities under the Big Creek Wetland and Restoration Activity; an area within Shelby wher th CBA ha developin flood control methodology and projects. 12. The University of Tennessee Agricultural Extensio provides the University of Tennessee as the outreach unit of the Institute of Ag -based information to citizens throughout the state. Additionally, in coo milies, youth and communities to improve lives by addressing s levels Shelby County in implementing the NDR award, UT Extension’s (especially in Big Creek and South Cypress Creek) which will educate the community about food and gardening and the creation of community gardens as alternative food sources within the community.  

13. Memphis Center for Food and Faith (MCFF) and Grow Memphis (which recently merged to become Memphis Tilth) are local nonprofit organizations identified in Phase 2 who will work with Shelby County during Phase 3 implementation to engage in urban agriculture and community gardening activities designed to bring fresh and healthy food alternatives to citizens residing in the Big Creek and South Cypress Creek communities. As partners, they will work to establish community gardens and healthy food options for these areas to enhance greater access to fresh food.  

14. The Hyde Family Foundations (a local philanthropy) and the Greater Memphis Chamber gifted $\$157,000$ and $\$57,000$ respectively to support a coordinator position to transition the GREENPRINT from plan to implementation. Their roles in the NDR through support of this position provide additional support for the Regional Resilience Plan funded under the NDR award.  

# Key Agencies, Partners, Positions, Personnel:  

The following outlines the partners who will work directly with or provide support to Shelby County in its efforts to carry out NDR projects and activities as well as their roles in the implementation of “Making Room for the River” concepts.   
1. Shelby County’s role, through the Divisions of Planning and Development and Public Works (and their associated Departments), is as that of the lead on the NDR award. Shelby County will actively administer the NDR grant, oversee activity design and development, and implement the 4 activities funded under the NDR award (Big Creek, Wolf River, South Cypress, and the Regional Resilience Plan). The County will work closely with each identified partner to insure that activities move forward, are fiscally feasible, and that NDR funds are properly utilized and accounted for throughout the grant award which ends September 2022.   
Additionally, Shelby County in its role as the lead on Phase 1, Phase 2, and subsequently the NDR award implementation lead is responsible for insuring that the following supporting leverage commitments are met:   
a) Projects integral to the development of the GREENPRINT network involving the development of proposed trail corridors of the  

GREENPRINT network including the Shelby Farms Greenline and park trails (\$5,822,181);   
b) Fletcher Creek Greenway, Overton Park Cooper Street Trail and Perimeter Trail, Germantown Greenway, Chelsea Avenue Greenline, South Memphis Greenline, Shelby Farms Greenline Bridge, and Arlington Bike/Pedestrian Trail funded through DPD’s Memphis Urban Area Metropolitan Planning Organization $(\$4,338,696)$ ; and   
c) The Shelby County’s drainage study for resilient approaches to address impacts from the 2011 qualified disasters and future flooding along Big Creek $(\$72,000)$ .   
2. City of Memphis, a partner since Phase 1 of the NDRC process, is the largest municipality in Shelby County with a population of nearly 650,000. Two of the NDR activities (Wolf River and South Cypress Creek) are directly located within the Memphis city limits. Under Phase 3, Memphis will play a key role in assisting in the overall design and implementation of the both of these projects. As a partner in the NDR grant, Memphis is providing a total of $\$4,100,000$ in direct leverage through its Public Works Division and Division of Housing and Community Development (HCD). This leverage can be broken out as follows: $\$2,500,000$ for the Wolf River Wetland and Restoration and $\$1,600,000$ for the South Cypress Creek Activity (\$1,500,000 from Public Works and $\$100,000$ from HCD). The City is also a partner in the Shelby County Resilience Council (SCRC) a multi-disciplinary team appointed by Shelby County Mayor Mark H. Luttrell, Jr. to formalize development and implementation of the Greenprint for Resilience Project. Also, the City of Memphis is filling a developmental role in support of the NDR application and activities by providing $\$34,423,302$ for construction and completion of the Main-to-Main Multimodal Connector Project managed by the City of Memphis, connecting Memphis to the City of West Memphis, Arkansa, including the Harahan Bridge connection across the Mississippi River; which furthers regional interconnectedness of the Greenprint.  

3. GCR Inc. has also been involved in the NDR grant since the Phase 1 application and prior to the Phase 3 award. GCR will continue to provided project management and technical assi  

# Key Agencies, Partners, Positions, Personnel:  

ntract period with HUD which terminates in September of 2022. GCR staff members have worked with several state clients to develop, implement, and monitor CDBGDR programs. GCR possesses extensive expertise in developing systems that track stages of recovery from immediate response, program development and management, public visibility of expenditures, and progress of recovery resources. Their role will be to provide direct grants management technical assistance to Shelby County to insure compliance, public access to information, and effective administration of resources.  

4. Another partner, the Community Development Council of Greater Memphis (CD Council) is a coalition of community and housing development organizations, non-profits, and individuals who support the development and redevelopment of vibrant and economically sustainable neighborhoods. Livable Memphis, a program within CD Council, promotes the same priorities with a special focus on growth and development issues – including land use and transportation – and on increasing public participation in planning and development decisions. As a partner under Phase 3, the CD Council (and Livable Memphis) will provide direct community outreach and awareness efforts to assist Shelby County in its efforts to fully engage the community. Its close ties with CDCs, Neighborhoods, and other non-profits will provide Shelby County and the other NDR partners with direct links in the community to enhance input into the Resilience Plan as well as the other three NDR activities approved under Phase 3.  

5. Pique PR is a full-service PR agency based in Memphis, Tennessee who has been involved with Shelby County’s NDR application from the beginning of Phase 1. Pique will continue its partnership through Phase 3 of the grant and will continue to provide Shelby County with support for public events associated with public outreach, community engagement, and marketing efforts under the NDR award.  

6. Kimley-Horn; Barge Waggoner Sumner and Cannon; and Sasaki and Associates are the team of consultants who have been involved in the NDR grant since the Phase 1 application and prior to the Phase 3 award. These partners have combined expertise in architecture, urban design, landscape architecture, civil engineering, environmental reviews, permitting, water resources, and other services to support the proposed resilience project. Furthermore, these partners have specialized experience in stormwater modeling, GIS-based applications, creation and permitting of wetlands at both the state and federal levels, and design and implementation of green infrastructure in Memphis and Shelby County as well as nationwide.  

a) Kimley-Horn will continue their partnership with Shelby County to carry out environmental reviews and architectural/engineering designs associated with the Wolf River Wetland Restoration and Greenway activity, which includes the components of Kennedy Park, Rodney Baber Park, and Orchi Road Improvements. All of these activities comprise the activity along the Wolf River Conservancy’s Wolf River restoration area in Central Shelby County and the greenway trail system tying these activities together.  

b) Barge Waggoner Sumner and Cannon will continue their partnership role in carrying out environmental reviews and architectural/engineering designs associated with the Big CreeWtnRstrtoPoet.Tesdsgsnspwlivveoraogns;iCeeadwilfcuowtadrstrtond  

# Key Agencies, Partners, Positions, Personnel:  

velopment of proposed amenities, and the interconnectedness of public access throughout the development.  

c) Sasaki and Associates will continue their partnership role in carrying out environmental reviews and architectural/engineering designs associated with the South Cypress Creek Watershed and Neighborhood Redevelopment. The designs will focus on both wetland restoration designs which strengthen community and social cohesion, repurposing vacant lots to accomplish community and economic development, and increase access to fresh, healthy foods.  

7. The Wolf River Conservancy (WRC) has been a key participant and partner during the development of both Phase 1 and Phase 2 of the NDR competition. A non-profit that protects habitats within the Wolf River watershed, spearheads the Wolf River Greenway project along the urban Wolf River, connects people of all ag e Wolf River thro nd provides outstanding recreational opportunities for the community; WRC has helped to rotec in the Wolf Rive to enhance the entire Wolf River floodplain and protect critical aquifer recharge areas for public drinkin $\$34$ million in leverage under Phase 3 of the NDR award, WRC will continue the same efforts Wetla d Restoratio and Greenway Activity. WRC’s direct role will be developing th and Rodney Baber Parks and enhances overall access to parks and nway continues to grow). A key role of WRC in Phase 3 of the NDR award is the provision of $\$31,500,000$ in direct leverage for the Wolf River Greenway and Restoration Activity.  

8. United Housing Incorporated (UHI), as identified in Phase 2, is a local nonprofit organization engaged in homebuyer education, community development, down payment assistance, and housing rehabilitation and construction who will serve as a partner in  

the South Cypress Creek activity. United Housing, a part of the Neighbor Works America Network, will provide support in developing and retaining housing in South Cypress Creek in order to stabilize and improve the housing stock of the area and assist in relocating residents from flood prone housing into new and/or rehabilitated housing in the neighborhood. This newly created housing will, to the greatest extent possible, incorporate energy efficiency, renewable energy, and low impact development into the designs. In this role, UHI will work closely with Shelby County and Habitat for Humanity of Greater Memphis to carryout activities to stabilize and enhance the living environment within the South Cypress Creek community to create stronger and healthier neighborhood.   
9. Similar to UHI, Habitat for Humanity of Greater Memphis (HFHGM) is a nonprofit housing ministry dedicated to eliminating substandard housing from the city of Memphis and surrounding areas, while making decent housing for all people a matter of conscience and action. Identified as a partner in Phase 2 of the NDR competition, HFHGM will play a role in the implementation of Phase 3 by providing one or more of the following: homebuyer education, counseling, housing repairs, and/or new construction. Inthisrole,HFHGMwill   
workcloselywithShelbyCounty andUHItocarryoutactivities tostabilize andenhancethelivingenvironme  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Overall</td><td>This Report Period</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$140,165,341.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$60,445,162.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$60,445,162.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$693,816.90</td><td>$2,807,575.42</td></tr><tr><td> Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$693,816.90</td><td>$2,807,575.42</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$693,816.90</td><td>$2,807,575.42</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Progress Toward Required Numeric Targets  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Requirement</td><td>Target</td><td>Actual</td></tr><tr><td>Overall Benefit Percentage (Projected)</td><td></td><td>74.85%</td></tr><tr><td>Overall BenefitPercentage (Actual)</td><td></td><td>27.30%</td></tr><tr><td>Minimum Non-Federal Match</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Limit on Public Services</td><td>$9,066,774.45</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Limit on Admin/Planning</td><td>$12,089,032.60</td><td>$1,441,874.37</td></tr><tr><td>Limit on State Admin</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$260,252.23</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Threshold (Projected)</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Overall Progress Narrative:  

During the reporting period, Shelby County moved the NDR program forward through the continued process of carrying out activities under: (1) the Master Resilience Plan, (2) Hydraulic Modeling, and (3) the environmental review, and project design for the major NDR activities (South Cypress Creek, Wolf River Wetland and Restoration Greenway, and Big Creek Wetland and Recreation Area), and the bidding out of Phase 8 of the Wolf River Greenway.   
NDR Projects 1-NDR-01 (Hydraulic Modeling), 1-NDR-02 (Master Resilience Plan), 2-NDR-06 (South Cypress Creek Engineering and Testing), 3-NDR-05 (Wolf River Engineering and Testing), 3-NDR-07 (Wolf River Greenway - Infrastructure & Construction), Big Creek 4 - NDR - 05 (Tree Planting), 4-NDR-06 (Big Creek Engineering for Floodway design and landscape architecture) and 5-NDR-01 (Administration) are all underway and/or moving forward.   
As of March 31, 2018, Shelby County had drawn down $\$693,816.90$ in grant funds from DRGR for the reporting period of January 1 – March 31, 2018.   When combined with the $\$2$ ,113,758.52 drawn during the previous reporting periods, Shelby County had drawn a total of $\$2,807,575,42$ in DRGR.  As of the  

end of the quarter, all funds drawn from DRGR had been expended by the County.  

Other key overall accomplishments during the quarter included: (List key accomplishments)  

1. Met with HUD Representatives Frank McNally, Terry Ware, and Telly O’Neil on March 22, 2018 to discuss the NDR Grant for Shelby County (Agenda and presentation attached).  

2. Hydraulic Modeling. All three consulting teams were finalizing all components of the Hydraulic Modeling. The final, calibrated HMS and HEC-RAS models were complete. All reports were complete and mapping and chart templates were $95\%$ complete. The Hydraulic model is currently on schedule to be completed in the next quarter (April – June 2018) with actual completion anticipated by April 30, 2018.  

3. Master Resilience Plan.  The Master Plan was fully underway with 3 Public Hearings taking place during the end of January and first of February 2018. Data collected from these meetings, local meetings with stakeholders, and existing disaster information was being compiled for analysis.  

4. The first 8-Step Notice for the Wolf River Greenway ran in three local newspapers on 2/22, 2/23 and 2/25.  The Notice was also published on the Resilient Shelby webpage. FEMA was notified of the 8-Step Notice at the same time. The Notice was open for comments through March 15, 2018.  

5. NEPA Letters associated with the Big Creek Wetland Project went out to Fish and Wildlife, the Corps of Engineers, TWRA, TVA, TDOT, and TDEC on 3/29.  Letters for the 106 Review Consultation were drafted for distribution to the local Tribal Leaders who might wish to be a consulting party during the process and will mail the first of April.  

6. Four alternative creek designs were developed for the South Cypress Creek Project and were being reviewed fo viability and anticipated cost.  Once a design is selected the NEPA process for the area can begin. Specific details on actions and accomplishments under each of these activities is provided under each activity narrative within this QPR.  

# Project Summary  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Project #, Project Title</td><td colspan="2">This Report Period To Date</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>Project Funds Budgeted</td><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td></tr><tr><td>1 - NDR, Regional Resilience Plan - NDR</td><td>$292,389.85</td><td>$2,100,000.00</td><td>$1,181,622.14</td></tr><tr><td> 2 - NDR, South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood</td><td>$148,094.42</td><td>$8,988,097.00</td><td>$372,808.50</td></tr><tr><td>3 - NDR, Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway - NDR</td><td>$61,950.00</td><td>$18,260,842.00</td><td>$411,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>4 - NDR, Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area -NDR</td><td>$126,983.20</td><td>$29,447,227.00</td><td>$581,892.55</td></tr><tr><td>5 - NDR, Administration - NDR</td><td>$64,399.43</td><td>$1,648,997.00</td><td>$260,252.23</td></tr><tr><td>6 - LTC, Long Term Commitments - LTC</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>7 - SL, Supporting Leverage - SL</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>8 - OV, Outcome Values - OV</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activities  

# Project # / Title: 1 - NDR / Regional Resilience Plan - NDR  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number: Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">1 - NDR - 01 Hydraulic Modeling</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td> Planning</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>1-NDR</td><td colspan="2">Regional Resilience Plan - NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>03/30/2017</td><td colspan="2">11/30/2017</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Area(） National Objective:</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td>Urgent Need</td><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,300,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,300,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,300,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$220,989.85</td><td>$1,016,722.14</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$220,989.85</td><td>$1,016,722.14</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $220,989.85</td><td>$1,016,722.14</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$1,016,722.14</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$220,989.85</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Hydraulic Modeling of the three major drainage Basins in Shelby County as a part of the Master Resilience Plan for Shelby County.  

# Location Description:  

3 watersheds of Shelby County.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

By the end the reporting quarter, all of the Hydraulic Modeling are $95\%$ completed on all three major basins. Calibrations of the HMS and HEC-RAS models based on the 2011 flood event were being finalized, and mapping of 100-year, 500-year, and historic flood events along all three basins was wrapping up on the activity.  It is still anticipated, based on current project status, that the Hydraulic Study will reach completion by the end of April 2018  

barring any unforeseen events.  

As for the Hydraulic Modeling of the LOOSAHATCHIE RIVER, the 2011 flood event had been reviewed and the 100-year and 500-year flooding patterns were still being adjusted for final reporting and use. Mapping was underway and an outline draft for the Hydraulic study related to the Loosahatchie River and flood events had been developed.  Synthetic storms flows were being finalized and final text for the overall report were underway.  

Activities within the NONCONNAH BASIN included: completion of the calibrations of the HMS and HEC-RAS model for the Nonconnah Basin and completion of the mapping and the chart templates for the basin.  At the end of the quarter, a draft report had been developed and was awaiting review and comment Shelby County.  

Finally, activities within the WOLF RIVER Basin included: final calibration of the HMS and HEC-RAS models was $95\%$ complete with the only item left being review of data on the synthetic storm measurements at the Hollywood gauge along the Wolf.  Reporting on this portion of the Hydraulic modeling was underway. Based on the level of completion of the hydraulic study work along the Wolf River, this portion of the study should be completed by the end of April 2018.  

Again, all projections based on activity under the Hydraulic Modeling indicate that the activity will wrap up within the next quarter, with the anticipated completion date being April 30, 2018.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of Plans or Planning Products</td><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Activity Supporting Documents  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td colspan="2">1 - NDR - 02</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Master Planning</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Planning</td><td>Planned</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1 - NDR</td><td>Regional Resilience Plan - NDR</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>03/30/2017</td><td>06/30/2019</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area（）</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>National Objective:</td><td>Responsible Organization:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Urgent Need</td><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 N/A</td><td>To Date $800,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td></td><td>$800,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$800,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$164,900.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$71,400.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$71,400.00</td><td>$164,900.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$164,900.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$71,400.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$71,400.00</td><td>$164,900.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Resilience planning, data development, public input and Resilience Plan finalization to establish long term resilience for Shelby County.  

# Location Description:  

Shelby County, Tennessee  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The QPR for January – March 2018 summarizes the Regional Master Plan activity which occurred during this reporting period. The first quarter of 2018 saw the planning process fully underway with numerous outreach efforts taking place within the community.  During the quarter three Public Hearings to solicit input from the community were held.  These meetings were advertised on the Resilient Shelby website, on the NDR Facebook page at www.facebook.com/ShelbyNDR/, and notices ran in the following local newspapers: The Memphis Flyer (1/11/2018), The Desoto Times (1/11/2018), The Daily News (1/12/2018) and in La Prensa Latina (1/14/2018).  The meetings were held in three separate locations in the region and were designed to set the tone for the overall planning process, create interest in the Resilience Plan, and to solicit input from those in attendance. The meetings were held from 6:00 PM to 7:30 PM at the following locations:  Memphis Leadership Foundation (1/30/2018), Baker Community Center (1/31/2018) and the Southaven Public Library (2/1/2018).  A copy of the planning presentation is attached.  

Additionally, three other activities took place to promote input into the plan, (1) an article in the HighGround News (1/24/2018) was also published promoting the Resilience Plan and outlining the events that led up to the plan, (2) a presentation was made at the quarterly Pizza with Planners (3/13/2018) through an invitation by Building Memphis to address the community, and (3) a survey was sent out to stakeholders data base to identify individuals and organizations willing to share information about the plan, workshops and activities. A total of 26 responses were received. A copy of the summary is attached.  

Also, direct planning conversations took place between Office of Resilience (NDR Grant) staff with the following 11 cities/municipalities to insure input into the Regional Resilience Plan based on their community’s disaster recovery and resilience activities:  Bartlett, TN; Lakeland, TN; Gallaway, TN; Oakland, TN; Germantown, TN; Rossville, TN; Olive Branch, MS; Southaven, MS; Horn Lake, MS; Hernando, MS; and Desoto County, MS.  

Work also took place on an area study map related to the 2011 flood.  The study map is a base map that will ultimately illustrate the 2011 flood extent, and parcel impacts.  Once the three projects are complete, there will be additional information added to the map that will illustrate the mitigation effects of the three projects.  In addition, the map will be used as a reference for water resources and future resilience planning.  For example, road closures and flooding hot spots.  The map can also potentially be used as a working model for the progress that is occurring at all three sites (current draft is attached).  

e status of overall planning activity as of March 31, 2018, is as follows:  

1. Phase 1 of the Plan which includes 3 Public Meetings, Data Collection, Plans Review, Historical Research, Threat Definition Vulnerability Analysis is $100\%$ complete.  

2. Phase 2 of the Plan which includes Site Sustainability Analysis, Spatial Strategy Development, Policy Review and analysis, and a second round of three Public meetings is $40\%$ complete.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total/ Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"># of Plans or Planning Products</td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr><tr><td>#of community engagement</td><td>3</td><td>3/9</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Activity Supporting Documents  

Document 1- NDR- 02 \$71,400.pdf   
Document MSRRP_ Stakeholder Survey Report_Comments.pdf   
Document Master Plan 1st Public Meetings Feedback Summary_2-15-2018.pdf   
Document Workshop 1 Presentation.pdf   
Document NDR_Database_Base Map.pdf  

# Project # / Title: 2 - NDR / South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood  

# Grantee Activity Number: 2 - NDR - 01 Activity Title: Infrastructure  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities </td><td colspan="2"> Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>2 -NDR</td><td colspan="2">South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood </td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area(） National Objective:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,320,500.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,320,500.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td></td><td>$1,320,500.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Actual Construction of the South Cypress Neighborhood Development  Infrastructure Projects including reuse of repurposed vacant lots, community gardens, bidding, contract approval, and construction within the community.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed in Southwest Memphis, Tennessee 35.059753, -90.091317  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of Linear feet of green public 0</td><td>0/16000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Beneficiaries Performance Measures  

No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Flood Mitigation/Stormwater</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Dike/dam/stream-river bank repairs</td><td colspan="2">Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>2 -NDR</td><td colspan="2">South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area（）</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N/A</td><td>$2,038,736.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$2,038,736.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$2,038,736.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Actual Construction of the South Cypress Watershed and Neighborhood Development Project including bidding, contract approval, and construction within the community.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed in Southwest Memphis, Tennessee 35.059753, -90.091317  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">AccomplishmentsPerformance Measures</td><td rowspan="2">CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">#of Linearmiles ofPublic</td><td>This Report Period</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">14</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources City of Memphis Public Works Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$1,500,000.00  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>2 - NDR - 03</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>Program Capital Costs</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Program Capital Costs</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2"> Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>2 - NDR</td><td colspan="2">South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Area（） National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td></td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td> Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 N/A</td><td>$450,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$450,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td></td><td>$450,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Actual Construction of the South Cypress Watershed and Neighborhood Development Project including bidding, contract approval, and construction within the community.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed in Southwest Memphis, Tennessee 35.059753, -90.091317  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td><td rowspan="2">CumulativeActual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">#ofAcreswetlands</td><td>This Report Period</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/85</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">16</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td colspan="2">2 - NDR - 04</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Property Acquisitions</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition - general</td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>2 - NDR</td><td colspan="2">South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>01/15/2018</td><td colspan="2">02/15/2019</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Area(） National Objective:</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td>Urgent Need</td><td colspan="2"> Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,901,678.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,901,678.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,901,678.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Voluntary acquisition of property which will be permanently returned to floodway/wetland as part of the overall resilience project  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed in Southwest Memphis, Tennessee 35.059753, -90.091317  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"># of Parcels acquired voluntarily</td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/14</td></tr><tr><td>Total acquisition compensation to</td><td>0</td><td>0/1901678</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 2 - NDR - 05  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Activity Title: New Housing Development</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Rehabilitation/reconstruction of residential structures</td><td> Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>2 -NDR</td><td>South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>07/01/2018</td><td>07/30/2019</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Direct ( HouseHold )</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective:</td><td>Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td>Low/Mod</td><td>Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A $1,512,500.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $1,512,500.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $1,512,500.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Reconstruction of infill housing and housing rehabilitation for residents who participated voluntarily in property acquisition to include homebuyer assistance and assistance waivers to eligible homebuyers, as necessary.  New activities will be added in the future to reflect non-LMI households assisted and other housing activity if necessary.  Actual household income will be documented as individual clients are served under this activity.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed in Southwest Memphis, Tennessee 35.059753, -90.091317  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

Accomplishments Performance Measures No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources City of Memphis Housing Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$100,000.00  

# Grantee Activity Number: 2 - NDR - 06  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Engineering and Testing</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="3">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="3"> Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="3">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>2 - NDR Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="3">South Cypress Creek Watershed & Neighborhood Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>03/30/2017</td><td colspan="3">08/01/2019</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="3">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Area(） National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td colspan="3">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,764,683.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,764,683.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,764,683.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$148,094.42</td><td>$372,808.50</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$148,094.42</td><td>$372,808.50</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received Total Funds Expended</td><td>$148,094.42</td><td></td><td>$372,808.50</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$148,094.42</td><td></td><td>$372,808.50</td></tr><tr><td> Shelby County Government2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Development of environmental review, architectural and engineering designs and costs associated with overall design and implementation.  

# Location Description:  

Funds will be used to design the Cypress Creek Prject within the City of Memphis in Southwest Memphis, Tennessee. 35.059753, -90.091317  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The QPR for January – March 2018 summarizes the South Cypress Creek Design and Environmental activity which occurred during this reporting period.  As of the close of the first quarter of 2018, the South Cypress Creek -Design and Environmental Activity was approximately $40\%$ complete.   
1. This consisted of Task 1 which consists of Project Initialization being $80\%$ complete.  Key activity under Task 1 $(80\%$ complete) included Team and Project meetings, project coordination between Sasaki Team members, and document/data acquisition and review.   
2. Under Task 2 of the activity (also $80\%$ complete) key progress included creation and refinement of designs for the activity, review of 4 alternative concept designs within the South Cypress Creek project area, the refinement of stream alignments and layouts, the execution of access studies, coordination with engineering flood control  

approaches, and CAD base file creation.  

3. Task 3 (Detailed Design Development) and Task 4 (Final Design of the Project) had not begun as of the end of March 31,   
2018.  

At the close of the quarter, Shelby County had met with partners on the project (and specifically with the City of Memphis) and were looking at the details associated with Design Option 3 for development of the South Cypress Creek Project.  Other activities that are anticipated to move forward into the second quarter of 2018 include: NEPA scheduling, meetings with TDEC, USACE and other permitting office, and more detailed analysis hydraulics (backwater), review of a single channel design, and more detailed review and discussion the Design Concepts for development and finalization of the NEPA process and the South Cypress Creek Project.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>#ofAcres wetlands</td><td>0</td><td>0/15</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

Activity Supporting Documents Document 2- NDR- 06  \$148,094.42.pdf  

# Project # / Title: 3 - NDR / Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway - NDR  

# Grantee Activity Number: Activity Title:  

# Orchi Road Complete Street - Infrastructure & Cons  

Activitiy Category:   
Construction/reconstruction of streets   
Project Number:   
3 - NDR   
Activity Status:   
Planned   
Project Title:   
Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway - NDR   
Projected Start Date:   
04/01/2019   
Benefit Type:   
Area (  )   
National Objective:   
Low/Mod   
Projected End Date:   
05/01/2021   
Completed Activity Actual End Date:  

Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,151,549.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,151,549.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,151,549.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Reconstruction of Orchi Road to prevent future flooding of the are and to link low income residents with the greenway and parks being developed under this project  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West 35.177991, -89.937286  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of Linear feet of Public</td><td>0</td><td>0/1000</td></tr><tr><td># of Linear miles of Public</td><td>0</td><td>0/2</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Beneficiaries Performance Measures  

No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>3-NDR</td><td colspan="2">Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway -NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>04/01/2019 Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">05/01/2021</td></tr><tr><td>Area(）</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,688,645.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,688,645.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,688,645.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Reconstruction of Rodney Baber Park to create a more resilient park that links the Wolf River greenway, Kennedy Park and the Orchi Road activities.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West 35.196180, -89.987756  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">smmemts PerformanceMeasures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>#of buildings (non-residential) 0</td><td>0/2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>26</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# of public facilities # of Linear feet of green public  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources City of Memphis Public Works Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$1,500,000.00 \$0.00  

# Grantee Activity Number: 3 - NDR -04 Activity Title: Park Earthwork/Utilities/Demolition  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Vy</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td rowspan="3"> Planned</td><td rowspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Project Number: Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>3-NDR</td><td colspan="2">Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway - NDR Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date: 04/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">05/01/2021</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Area（） National Objective:</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$3,929,985.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td></td><td>$3,929,985.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$3,929,985.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Reconstruction of the restoration area associated with the Wolf River Wetland and Restoration Greenway  project.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West 35.196180, -89.987756 to 35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total/ Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>#ofAcreswetlands</td><td>0</td><td>0/5</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 3 - NDR -05  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">y</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Engineering and Testing</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Activitiy Category:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>3-NDR</td><td colspan="2">Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway - NDR Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Projected Start Date:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">04/01/2017 Benefit Type:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date: Area(）</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">National Objective: Responsible Organization: Urgent Need</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>N/A $1,941,677.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated $0.00</td><td>$0.00 $1,941,677.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$1,941,677.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$61,950.00 $411,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$61,950.00 $411,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$61,950.00 $411,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$61,950.00 $411,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Development of environmental review, architectural and engineering design and costs associated with overall design and implementation of the Wolf River Wetland and Restoration Greenway project.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West 35.196180, -89.987756, 35.198212, -89.910189, from 35.196180, -89.987756 to 35.198212, -89.910189 and 35.177991, - 89.937286  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The QPR for January – March 2018 summarizes the Wolf River Design and Environmental activity which occurred during this reporting period.  As of the close of the first quarter of 2018, the first Notices had been published under the required 8-Step Review process.  Notices ran in The Memphis Flyer (2/22/2018), The Daily News (2/23/2018) and La Prensa Latina (2/25/2018).  The review and comment period ran from the dates of publication through March 15, 2018. Additionally, the Notice was provided to FEMA, the HUD Region IV Environmental Office, and the HUD Region IV CPD Field Office on February 21, 2018.  No comments were received during the review period.  At the close of the quarter, Shelby County and its partners in the project were preparing to publish the second 8-Step Review Notice during the month of April 2018. Also during the reporting period, a Bat Habitat Assessment for the Indiana and Northern Long-eared Bat was  

conduct on the Wolf River Project in compliance with the US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS).  Based on the assessment and the response from the USFWS an emergence survey will be performed sometime between May and August 2018 to furthe assess whether bats are present in the project area. Furthermore, efforts continued to get topographic information on the area. Specific accomplishments include:  

Rodney Baber Park – (1) All preliminary Jurisdictional Determinations (JD) were completed on the Park, (2) it was determined that wetland mitigation will be performed on-site and will not require use of a land bank and (3) the ARAP will be completed upon final determination of park designs (a design meeting has been schedule for April 19, 2018 with the City of Memphis Parks Division.  

Kennedy Park – (1) the ARAP is complete and Kimley-Horn and Associates was preparing to submit the information to the State of Tennessee through TDEC for review and (2) the preliminary JD was completed.  

Orchi Street – Discussion took place on the location of potential storm water detention areas along the Orchi Street activity area, structural designs for flood control in the activity area was underway, and analysis of FEMA permitting activity in the area was moving forward  

Finally, the NEPA continues to move forward on the project and the preliminary designs for Rodney Baber Park, Kennedy Park and Orchi Street are under review by the project team members. It is anticipated that designs will be completed during the nex reporting period. At the close of the quarter, designs drawings were approximately $60\%$ complete.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of Linear feet of green public</td><td>0</td><td>0/1000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources City of Memphis Public Works Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$250,000.00 \$0.00  

# Activity Supporting Documents  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td colspan="2">3 - NDR -06</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Property Acquisition</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition - general</td><td> Planned</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>3-NDR</td><td></td><td>Wolf River Wetland & Restoration Greenway - NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>03/08/2018</td><td>07/06/2018</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area(）</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>National Objective:</td><td>Responsible Organization:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Urgent Need </td><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td></td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31,2018 N/A</td><td>$112,400.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$112,400.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$112,400.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Voluntary purchase of property easements along the Wolf River Greenway all for the development of trailways along the Wolf River Greenway and Restoration Project which links Kennedy Park, Rodney Baber Park, and Orchi Road.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West 35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"># of Parcels acquired voluntarily</td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr><tr><td>Total acquisition compensation to</td><td>0</td><td>0/112400</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">cohstructio</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td rowspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td rowspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>3-NDR Wolf River Wetland &Restoration Greenway-NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td rowspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2017 09/01/2019</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area(）</td><td rowspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">National Objective:</td></tr><tr><td>Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 N/A</td><td>To Date $9,000,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td></td><td>$9,000,000.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$9,000,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Construction of the Wolf River Greenway Trail system in conjunction with this project and as outlined in the Regional Greenprint.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West 35.196180, -89.987756 to 35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

As of the close of the first quarter of 2018, Phase 8 was still undergoing the contracting process within Shelby County Government.  Upon completion of the contracting process, the successful bidding contractor will be awarded the Phase 8 base upon the submitted bid of $\$909$ ,440 and will be issued a Notice to proceed on construction of Phase 8. As for Phase 10A off the Greenway, this phase was still in the process of being finalized for bid release.  Some small design issues and the purchase of several easements were slowing the bidding of Phase 10A. This slight delay does not have an impact on the overall anticipated completion date of the entire Wolf River Wetland and Restoration Project. Phases 6, 7, and 10 are currently undergoing design review and cost analysis along with standard pre-bidding  

activities to be place out for bid later in 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>#of Linear feet of green public 0</td><td>0/18000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources Wolf River Conservancy Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$31,500,000.00  

# Project # / Title: 4 - NDR / Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area - NDR  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>4 - NDR - 01</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td rowspan="2">Land Aquisition</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition - general</td><td> Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>4 - NDR</td><td>Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area-NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2019</td><td>06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Area（）</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>National Objective:</td><td>Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td>Urgent Need </td><td>Shelby County Government2</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$640,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$640,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$640,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Voluntary acquisition of property which will be permanently returned to floodway/wetland as part of the overall resilience project.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy   
Road on the West   
Located around 35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2"># of Parcels acquired voluntarily</td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/15</td></tr><tr><td>Total acquisition compensation to</td><td>0</td><td>0/640000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Beneficiaries Performance Measures  

No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Tey Nai! T INDN</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Overbank Excavation</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category: Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status: Planned</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">4 -NDR</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area - NDR</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">09/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022 Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Benefit Type: Area(）</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>N/A</td><td></td><td>$17,191,198.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$17,191,198.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$17,191,198.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Match Contributed</td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Construction of the Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area Designing and constructing flood mitigation and water quality projects such as ponds, retention basins, terraces, community gardens and park amenities. This is excavation to provide floodway for protection of the area North of Big Creek.  

# Location Description:  

Northern portion of Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett   
Parkway to Navy Road on the West   
35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

#  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Accomplishments Performance Measures</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>39</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>4 - NDR - 03</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>Recreational Facilities</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Recreational Facilities</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2">Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>4 - NDR</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area - NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area(） National Objective:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date: Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td>Urgent Need</td><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$5,236,797.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$5,236,797.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$5,236,797.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Construction recreational facilities associated within the Big Creek project along the Big Creek Floodway.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy   
Road on the West   
35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of buildings (non-residential)</td><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr><tr><td>#of Linear feet of Public</td><td>0</td><td>0/3</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>4 - NDR - 04</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>Bridge Modifications</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Bridge Modifications</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2">Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>4 - NDR</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area-NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2019</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area(）</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,953,027.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,953,027.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,953,027.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

These bridge modifications remove restrictions to flood waters and will directly benefit LMI areas in Millington which are North of Big Creek Floodwayby connecting them to the Big Creek facilities.  4 bridges will directly link these communities to the Big Creek development.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy   
Road on the West   
35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Work on this activity will begin once all Environmental Reviews and engineering design for the overall project has been completed and the FONSI/RROF has been published and forwarded to the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"># of public facilities</td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>0/4</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">43</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>4 - NDR - 05</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>Tree Planting</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Tree Planting</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>4 -NDR</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area - NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>01/01/2017</td><td colspan="2">08/01/2020</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area(）</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: Urgent Need </td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$125,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td></td><td>$125,000.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$125,000.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This activity is for the replanting of new tree canopy to insure that no net loss occurs to the tree canopy in the activity area due to work in the floodplain.  The performance measurement represents an average of 40 trees per acre.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy Road on the West.   
Various locations near 35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The Tree Planting activity as mentioned in previous QPRs has been placed on hold pending the completion of environmental reviews and engineering design of the overall project.  This was done in consultation with HUD due to tree planting is an activity under the project. The activity will move forward upon the completion of the FONSI/RROF and subsequent approval by the HUD Field Office.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td>This Report Period Total</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected Total</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>45</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Activity Title:  

# Engineering for Floodway design and landscape arch  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Acquisition, construction,reconstruction of public facilities</td><td colspan="2"> Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>4 -NDR</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek Wetland & Recreation Area-NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>01/01/2017</td><td colspan="2">08/01/2019</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: Area（）</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: Urgent Need</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31,2018 N/A</td><td>To Date $4,301,204.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$4,301,204.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$4,301,204.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$126,983.20</td><td>$581,892.55</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$126,983.20</td><td>$581,892.55</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$126,983.20</td><td>$581,892.55</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$126,983.20</td><td>$581,892.55</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Architect/Engineering and testing for design of the overbank excavation, flood mitigation and recreational facilities.  

# Location Description:  

Northern portion of Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy Road on the West.  

35.198212, -89.910189  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

As of the close of the first quarter of 2018, the following had taken place under this activity.   
1. The project team continued to compile Wetland and Stream Delineation field data in support of the Jurisdictional Determination and coordinated a meeting with USACE to discuss Section 408 permitting for the Big Creek Project. 2. The team began preliminary outline for NEPA documentation, which included: (1) a master agency coordination and expert contact list for the NEPA to insure coordination and input under the process, (2) preparing for and conducting agency coordination meetings with TDEC, TDOT, and the USACE,  (3) preparation of frequency depth-duration data for a TDOT mitigation site based on comments resulting from the all agency meeting and (4) by the close of the quarter, developing 106 letters for distribution to Indian Tribes from the area inviting them to be  

participating consultants if so desired in the project.  

3. The team continued to refine the hydraulic model to maximize the flood control in Area 3 of the overall project based on comments from the agency meeting, began and continued to prepare mass a grading plan and preliminary site plan to estimate earthwork quantities, and performed preliminary traffic forecast for the area to evaluate potential vehicular access, especially access options for Area 1.  

4. Prepared conceptual layouts for recreational and park features to discuss with stakeholders. This included: coordinating with team member W.H. Porter to survey proposed bridge locations, preparing conceptual layouts for recreational and park features for discussion with project stakeholders, working with County team member Sasaki, to continue developing project master plan for the project area, and preparing for and participated in coordination meeting with the City of Millington to discuss recreational needs.  

5. Finally, regular status meetings between all team members.  

Three areas that presented themselves as issues during the reporting period were the weather which was proving to cause a slight delay in completion of the wetland and stream delineations, the need for a bat mist net survey in the area, and the "potential” for archaeological issue within the project area.  However, these being coordinated with all necessary partners, agencies, and stakeholder to prevent them from becoming any long-term issue under the projects design and scope.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of buildings (non-residential)</td><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr><tr><td>#ofpublicfacilities</td><td>0</td><td>0/3</td></tr><tr><td># of Linear miles of Public</td><td>0</td><td>0/4</td></tr><tr><td>#ofAcreswetlands</td><td>0</td><td>0/500</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Activity Supporting Documents  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td colspan="2">5 - NDR -01</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Program Administration</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Administration</td><td colspan="2">Under Way</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>5 -NDR</td><td colspan="2"> Administration - NDR</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>03/01/2017</td><td colspan="2">09/30/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（） National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$1,648,997.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,648,997.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$1,648,997.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$64,399.43</td><td>$260,252.23</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$64,399.43</td><td>$260,252.23</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$64,399.43</td><td>$260,252.23</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$64,399.43</td><td>$260,252.23</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Activity Description: Grant Administration by Shelby County, Tennessee staff and consultants.  

# Location Description:  

Shelby County Division of Planning and Development  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Between January 1, 2018 and March 31, 2018, Shelby County continued to oversee activities under the NDR grant.  Team meetings with all partners involved in the environmental review and engineering and design of Big Creek, Wolf River, and South Cypress Creek continued to occur the first Tuesday of each month in order to identify the progress of each activity and identify any potential problems and/or outstanding issues.  Partners and staff  

involved in the Hydraulic study of the three major basins also meet on the first Tuesday of each month for the same reasons. Additionally, Shelby County and City of Memphis staff continued Friday morning SCRC meetings to address project issues and status.  Finally, Regional Resilience Planning conference calls were held each Friday afternoon in order to move the Resilience Plan forward.   
On March 13, 2018 the NDR Administrator at the invitation of Building Memphis made a presentation at the quarterly Pizza wit Planners at the Memphis Leadership Foundation to address the community on the NDR Grant and activities.   
During the reporting period Shelby County NDR staff met with HUD Representatives Frank McNally, Terry Ware, and Telly O’Neil on March 22, 2018 to discuss the NDR Grant for Shelby County. At that time, Shelby County made a presentation outlining the projects being developed under the grant and discussing the status of the grant as of the meeting date (presentation attached).   
As of March 31, 2018, Shelby County had drawn down $\$693,816.90$ in grant funds from DRGR for the reporting period of January 1 – March 31, 2018.   When combined with the $\$2$ ,113,758.52 drawn during the previous reporting periods, Shelby County had drawn a total of $\$2,807,575,42$ in DRGR.  As of the end of the quarter, all funds drawn from DRGR had been expended by the County.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

Activity Supporting Documents Document 5 -NDR- 01 \$64,399.43 Part 1.pdf  

Document Document Document Document Document Document  

5 -NDR- 01 \$64,399.43 Part 2.pdf   
Pizza With Planners - Analysis - Final - Actual Attendees.pdf   
Pizza With Planners - Resilience Presentation (003).pdf   
Shelby County Resilience Council Meetings January-March 2018.pdf   
Monthly Meetings Jan-March 2018.pdf   
Regional Resilience Planning Meetings January - March 2018.pdf  

# Project # / Title: 7 - SL / Supporting Leverage - SL  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number: 7 - SL - 01</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td> Greenprint Implementation and Staff Support</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Supporting Leverage</td><td>Under Way</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>7-SL</td><td>Supporting Leverage - SL</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016</td><td>06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （）</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

GREENPRINT Implementation Support - The Hyde Family Foundations, a local philanthropy, gifted $\$157,000.00$ and the Greater Memphis Chamber of Commerce committed an additional $\$57,000.00$ to fund a coordinator position to transition the GREENPRINT (the platform for the NDRC competition) from plan to implementation. This leverage also  

supports the Regional Resilience Plan activity developed in this application.  

# Location Description:  

The Memphis and West Memphis Metropolitan Planning organizations (MPOs) covering four counties and and 18 municipalities located in the States of Tennessee, Arkansas, and Mississippi.  The study areas boundaries include Shelby County, TN, and the cities of Arlington, Bartlett, Collierville, Germantown, Lakeland, Memphis, and Millington; northern DeSoto County, MS, including the the cities of Hernando, Horn Lake, Olive Branch, Southaven, and Walls; eastern Crittenden County, AR, including the cities of West Memphis, marion, and Sunset; and western Fayette County, TN, including the cities of Piperton, Galloway, and Braden.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Documentation on Supporting Leverage is being compiled for future reporting.  The Greenprint efforts are an on-going effort.  

Accomplishments Performance Measures No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources   
Greater Memphis Chamber of Commerce   
Hyde Family Foundation   
Total Other Funding Sources Amount   
\$57,000.00   
\$157,000.00 \$0.00  

# Grantee Activity Number: 7 - SL - 02  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Activity Title: Shelby Farms Greenline and Park Trails</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>Rehabilitation/reconstruction of a public improvement</td><td>Under Way</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>7 -SL</td><td>Supporting Leverage - SL</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2014</td><td>09/30/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources Total Budget</td><td>N/A $0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Shelby County's supporting leverage of $\$5,822$ ,181.00 is aligned with the Shelby Farms Greenline and Park Trails. These trail corridors were identified within the GREENPRINT will be and will further connect  recreational access points within Shelby Farms and creating a network for Shelby County citizens to access the park amenities without the need for a motorized vehicle.  

# Location Description:  

Shelby County (specifically, the Shelby Farms Park Greenline and Park trails, the Greenline connection to the Wolf River Restoration Greenway, a trail system from central Shelby County to the Frayser community.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Documentation on Supporting Leverage is being compiled for future reporting.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

# No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources Shelby County Government Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$5,822,181.00  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>7 - SL - 03</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>Main-to-Main Multimodel Connector</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Supporting Leverage</td><td>Under Way</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>7 -SL</td><td>Supporting Leverage - SL</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>01/01/2015</td><td>06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

The $\$34,423,402.00$ in supporting leverage under the Main to main connector provides direct bicycle and pedestrian access from downtown Memphis, TN to the City of West Memphis, AR via the Harahan Bridge  The project creates a pedestrian corridor across an active railway/highway bridge connector over the Mississippi River and allows individuals to directly bike, run, or walk from Tennessee to Arkansas across the river.  

# Location Description:  

Downtown Memphis, TN to the City of West Memphis, Arkansas via the Harahan Bridge across the Mississippi River.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Documentation on Supporting Leverage is being compiled for future reporting.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources City of Memphis Public Works Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$34,423,302.00  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>7 - SL - 04</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>Greenline and Trail Connectors</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Supporting Leverage</td><td>Under Way</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>7-SL</td><td>Supporting Leverage - SL</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>09/01/2014</td><td>06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

The $\$4,338,696,00$ in supporting levarage for the Greenline and Trail Connectors will further develop the overall Greenprint platform on which the NDR application was overlaid. The greenline and trail connectors are funded through the Memphis Urban Area Metropolitan Planning Organization, a Department of DPD. The connectors provide further access to areas of Shelby County using a more passive system of trails and greenways which allow individuals a form of alternate travel throughout the community via walking, running, or bicycling.  

# Location Description:  

The Greenline and trail are located along the Fletcher Creek Greenway, Overton Park Cooper Street Trail and Perimeter Trail, Germantown Greenway, Chelsea Avenue Greenline, South Memphis Greenline, Shelby Farms Greenline Bridge, and Arlington Bike/Pedestrian Trail  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Documentation on Supporting Leverage is being compiled for future reporting.  

Accomplishments Performance Measures No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources   
Memphis Urban Area Metropolitan Planning Organization   
Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount \$4,338,696.00  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td colspan="2">7 - SL - 05</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek Drainage Study</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td rowspan="2">Activity Status:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Supporting Leverage</td><td>Under Way</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td rowspan="2">Project Title:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>7-SL</td><td>Supporting Leverage - SL</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2014</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

The $\$72,000.00$ in supporting leverage was used to conduct a Big Creek Drainage Study.  The study was the result of the 2011 disasters, In response, Shelby County conducted a drainage study for innovative and resilient approaches to address potential future impacts from flooding along Big Creek. This study provides for baseline guidance in the design and development of the Big Creek Wetland and Restoration Greenway activity proposed in Phase 2 of the NDR application.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek and the Big Creek drainage basin in Northern Shelby County.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Documentation on Supporting Leverage is being compiled for future reporting.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

No Accomplishments Performance Measures  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources Shelby County Government Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-01-1 Activity Title: Shelby County OV - Resilience Plan  

Activitiy Category:   
NDR - Resilience Value   
Project Number:   
8 - OV   
Projected Start Date:   
12/21/2016   
Benefit Type:   
(  )   
National Objective:   
Low/Mod   
Activity Status:   
Under Way   
Project Title:   
Outcome Values - OV   
Projected End Date:   
07/01/2019   
Completed Activity Actual End Date:  

Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2  

# Overall  

Total Projected Budget from All Sources   
Total Budget   
Total Obligated   
Total Funds Drawdown Program Funds Drawdown Program Income Drawdown   
Program Income Received   
Total Funds Expended Shelby County Government2  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>ToDate $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>N/A $0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

The plan will consist of two parts:  a Hydraulic study of 3 major Drainage Basins in Shelby County and an overall plan that will engage the public and identify potential new resilience activities and projects that can be implemented as additional funds become available in the future.  The Baseline for this outcome is 0 and will produce 1 plan which will include hydraulic models.  

# Location Description:  

This is a Regional Plan that covers Shelby County and the Memphis MPO service area.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The plan will consist of two parts: A Hydraulic study of 3 major Drainage Basins in Shelby County and an overall plan that will engage the public and identify potential new resilience activities and projects that can be implemented as additional funds become available in the future. The Baseline for this outcome is 0 and will produce 1 plan which will include hydraulic models. Both the Hydraulic Study and the overall Master Resilience Plan are underway and the Outcome Value will be reported when completed.  

It is anticipated, based on current activity that the Hydraulic modeling of the three drainage basins (Nonconnah, Loosahatchie, and Wolf River) will be completed in the Spring of 2018.  The Master Resilience Plan development officially kicks-off in January and February of 2018.  The next measure will occur in December of 2018, with interim reports each quarter under the activities themselves.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of resilience plans created</td><td>0</td><td>0/1</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

# Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="3">South Cypress OV - Repurposed Lots</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="3">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Social Value</td><td colspan="3">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="3" rowspan="3">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td></tr><tr><td></td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date: 12/21/2016</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date: 06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td colspan="2">Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>To Date $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This activity will repurpose flood lots for other uses within the South Cypress Creek project area.  Uses at designated in the Phase 2 were classified as gardens, permanent flood plane lots, and wild lots).  Lots use and accomplishments will be determined per Sasaki design of the target ares. Proposed accomplishments to be determined upon design completion. The Baseline for this outcome is 0 and will outcomes will be based on the Sasaki designs.  The repurposed lots will be reported annually. 10 lots have been shown as a projection at this time based on preliminary designs.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed Development and Neighborhood Development Project in South Memphis, Tennessee: specifically Census Tract 222.20 Block Groups 2, 3, and 4.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This activity will repurpose flood lots for other uses within the South Cypress Creek project area. Uses as designated in the Phase 2 were classified as gardens, permanent flood plain lots, and wild lots. Lots use and accomplishments will be determined per Sasaki design of the target area. Proposed accomplishments to be determined upon design completion. The Baseline for this outcome is 0 and outcomes will be based on the Sasaki designs. The re-purposed lots will be reported annually. 10 lots have been shown as a projection based on preliminary designs.  

The South Cypress Creek Project is still in the environmental and design phase now and no action has taken place which enables a measurement under this outcome value. The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of vacant lots repurposed 0</td><td>0/10</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-02-2  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>South Cypress Ov - Property Value Increase</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">Activitiy Category:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Economic Value</td><td>Activity Status: Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td>Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016</td><td>06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（） National Objective: NA</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

The measure for this Outcome Value is a $3\%$ cumulative increase in the assessed property values within the project neighborhood over the next five year period.  The baseline for this outcome value is the 2011 property value leve which was assessed at $\$1$ $^{;1,160,490.00}$ (appraised value of $\$7,222,200$ ) per the Shelby County Assessor.  First measure of value will be in December 2017.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed Development and Neighborhood Development Project in South Memphis, Tennessee: specifically Census Tract 222.20 Block Groups 2, 3, and 4.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The measure for this Outcome Value is a $3\%$ cumulative increase in the assessed property values within the project neighborhood over the next five-year period. The baseline for this outcome value is the 2011 property value level which was assessed at $\$1,160,490.00$ (appraised value of $\$7,222,200$ ) per the Shelby County Assessor. First measure of value will be in December 2017.  

In 2017, during the Shelby County re-appraisal process, the current assessment value of the units previously identified in the project area was $\$1$ ,001,915 (with an appraised value of $\$4,479,100)$ .  While down from the 2011 assessment/appraised values, this will provide an excellent baseline for the area in the pre-development/construction phase.  Using this baseline, future measurements for this outcome value should present  

a clear picture as to whether increases in these values can possibly be attributed to the South Cypress Creek Restoration Project.  The next measurement will take place in December 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>% increase in median property 0</td><td>0/3</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: South Cypress OV - Restoration of Cypress Cre</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="3">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Environmental Value</td><td colspan="3"> Planned </td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="3">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="3">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="3">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016 Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="3">06/15/2022 Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（) National Objective:</td><td colspan="3">Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td>NA</td><td colspan="3">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget fromAll Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This Outcome Value Activity will lead to 3000 feet of stream restoration in the Cypress Creek Watershed and Neighborhood.  The current baseline is 0 since no stream restoration has occurred at this time. The total feet of stream restored will be reported upon completion of the project with interim feet record when possible each quarter.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed Development and Neighborhood Development Project in South Memphis, Tennessee: specifically Census Tract 222.20 Block Groups 2, 3, and 4.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This Outcome Value Activity will lead to 3000 feet of stream restoration in the Cypress Creek Watershed and Neighborhood. The current baseline is 0 since no stream restoration has occurred at this time. The total feet of stream restored will be reported upon completion of the project with interim feet record when possible each quarter. The South Cypress Creek Project is still in the environmental and design phase at this time and no action has taken place which enables a measurement under this outcome value. The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># linear feet of streams restored 0</td><td>0/3000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>8-OV-02-4</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td>South Cypress OV - Reduced Floodplain</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">Occupancy</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Occupahcy</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Resilience Value</td><td colspan="2"> Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="2">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016 Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>（)</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Through a visual survey, a baseline number of units in the 100 year floodway will be identified.  The number will be monitored as the South Cypress Creek Project progresses with a ultimate target outcome of having 0 lots in the neighborhood located in the 100 year flood plain.  The baseline for this activity is 20 units currently in the floodway as identified by the use of flood maps and a visual survey.  

# Location Description:  

South Cypress Creek Watershed Development and Neighborhood Development Project in South Memphis, Tennessee: specifically Census Tract 222.20 Block Groups 2, 3, and 4.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The baseline for this activity is 20 units currently in the floodway as identified using flood maps and a visual survey.  The South Cypress Creek Project is still in the environmental and design phase now and no action has taken place which enables a measurement under this outcome value. The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># occupied structures in floodplain 0</td><td>20/0</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td colspan="2">8-OV-03-1</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Wolf River Ov - Increased Greenway Use</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td rowspan="2">Activity Status:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Social Value</td><td>Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="2">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This outcome value anticipated increase from no current use to an average daily use of the Wolf River Wetland and Restoration Greenway of 200 individuals.  This will include individuals who walk, run, bike, etc. along the system.  The current baseline of this value is 0 since the trail is not complete.  Reporting on this activity will occur annually.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This outcome value anticipates an increase from no current use to an average daily use of the Wolf River Wetland and Restoration Greenway by 200 individuals. This will include individuals who walk, run, bike, etc. along the system. The current baseline of this value is 0 since the trail is not complete. Reporting on this activity will occur annually. At this time, the Wolf River Greenway Project and the activities associated with it are still in the environmental review and design stage. Therefore, no measurements on this outcome value are available for reporting for trail usage.  The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActual Total/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of users of trail system 0</td><td>0/200</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-03-2  

<html><body><table><tr><td>GranteeActvityNumber: Activity Title:</td><td>8-OV-03-2</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3">Wolf River OV - Attracting New Business</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Economic Value</td><td>Planned </td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Project Title:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td>Outcome Values - OV</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td>Projected End Date:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016</td><td>06/15/2022</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: Low/Mod</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This outcome values project to attract new businesses to the area as the project moves forward to completion at an estimate of 2 per year.  The current base line is 0 and the measure of new businesses opening in the area will be measured annually.  The value is to be reviewed annually.  The first measure will occur in December 2017.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West and new businesses generated within 1/2 mile of this area.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This outcome values projects to attract new businesses to the area as the project moves forward to completion at an estimate of 2 per year. The current base line is 0 and the measure of new businesses opening in the area will be measured annually. The value is to be reviewed annually. The first measure will occur in December 2017.  

During 2017, no construction began which could be directly attributed to the Wolf River Greenway.  However, at the end of 2017, 1,519 businesses were identified with a $1/2$ mile radius of the Wolf River Greenway Project Area.  This measurement will provide a strong baseline for the outcome value in the future as the Greenway project moves forward toward completion. New business can be tracked against this 2017 list of businesses.  A map and list of businesses has been uploaded as attachment to this value.  The next measurement will take place in December  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of new businesses locating 0</td><td>0/2</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-03-3  

<html><body><table><tr><td>8-OV-03' Activity Title:</td><td>Wolf River Ov - Increased Wetlands</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td>Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Environmental Value</td><td>Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td>Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date: 12/21/2016</td><td>Projected End Date: 06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type:</td><td>Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（） National Objective: NA</td><td>Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018 To Date</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N/A $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td> Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00 $0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This outcome value projects and increase of 12 acres of wetlands in the project area by project completion. The baseline for this outcome value is 859 acres based on wetland maps of the area between Kennedy and Rodney Baber Park.  This expansion will be measured on an annual basis with the first measure occuring in December 2017.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This outcome value projects and increase of 12 acres of wetlands in the project area by project completion. The baseline for this outcome value is 859 acres based on wetland maps of the area between Kennedy and Rodney Baber Park. This expansion will be measured on an annual basis with the first measure occurring in December 2017.   
At this time, the Wolf River Greenway Project and the activities associated with it are still in the environmental review and design stage. Therefore, no measurements on this outcome value are available for reporting for increase in wetlands in the area.  While in 2017, the Wolf River Conservancy did purchase mitigation credits related to the Wolf River Greenway for Epping Way/Kennedy Park Bike and Pedestrian Trails at the Wolf River.  This does not result in the creation on new wetlands. The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>#acres of wetlands created 0</td><td>859/12</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grantee Activity Number:</td><td>8-OV-03-4</td></tr><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Wolf River OV - Flood Cost Reduction</td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Resilience Value</td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="2">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （）</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31,2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Upon completion of the project, this outcome value projects a minimium of $\$5,000$ in flood damage to the infrastucture of the Rodney Baber due to floodwaters.  The measure will be made annually based on flooding in the project area. The baseline for this outcome is the the 2011 damage to Rodney Barer Park in 2011 which was $\$66,000$ .  The first annual report is in December 2017.  

# Location Description:  

Wolf River Watershed between Kennedy Park on the East and Rodney Baber Park on the West.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Upon completion of the project, this outcome value projects a minimum of $\$5,000$ in flood damage to the infrastructure of the Rodney Baber Park due to floodwaters.  The measure will be made annually based on flooding in the project area.  The baseline for this outcome is the 2011 damage to Rodney Baber Park in 2011 which was $\$66,000$ .  The first annual report is in December 2017.  

At this time, the Wolf River Greenway Project and the activities associated with it are still in the environmental review and design stage. Therefore, no measurements on this outcome value are available for reporting for Rodney Baber Park damage. No changes to the park have taken place at this time.  The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>$ estimated flood loss avoidance 0</td><td>66000/5000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-04-1  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="3">Big Creek Ov - Increased Greenway Use</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="3">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Social Value</td><td colspan="3">Planned</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3" rowspan="3">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016 Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022 Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（） National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This outcome value anticipates a use of the new trail system Increase in the utilization of of greenways and biking trails resulting from the activity. The current base line is 0 ero with no system in place and will be measured annually as the project moves to completion.  The projected us of the system upon completion is an average of 50 users a day. The first measurement will occur in December 2017.  The responsible entity is measurement will be the City of Millington/Millington Parks Department.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy Road on the West.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This outcome value anticipates a use of the new trail system increase in the utilization of greenways and biking trails resulting from the activity. The current base line is 0 with no system in place and will be measured annually as the project moves to completion. The projected use of the system upon completion is an average of 50 users a day. The first measurement will occur in December 2017. The responsible entity is measurement will be the City of Millington/Millington Parks Department.  In 2017, the trail system and designs for the Big Creek Project were still under environmental review and design.  Therefore, the baseline in 2017 remained at 0.  The next report on this outcome value will occur in December 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>CumulativeActualTotal/Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># of users of trail system 0</td><td>0/50</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

Amount  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-04-2  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="3">Big Creek Ov - Increased Housing Value</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="3">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Economic Value</td><td colspan="3"> Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="3">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="3">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="3">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016 Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="3">06/15/2022 Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（） National Objective:</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization:</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>NA</td><td colspan="3">Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td></td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total FundsDrawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>$0.00</td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

The outcome value projects an increase in the value of building permits pulled in the Millington community of $\$1,500,000$ for rehabilitation and/or new construction of housing stock by the end of the project.  The baseline for this value was the value and number of permits issued in Millington for 2015 which was $\$606,638.10$ in permit value and 62 permits issues. The Increase in value of housing stock will be measured annually. with the first measurement occuring in December 2016.  The Division of Planning and Development is responsible for this measurment.  The first report on this value will take place in December 2017.  

# Location Description:  

Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy Road on the West.  The Millington community is identified as the metric to be used for the measurement.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

The outcome value projects an increase in the value of building permits pulled in the Millington community of $\$1,500,000$ for rehabilitation and/or new construction of housing stock by the end of the project. The baseline for this value was the value and number of permits issued in Millington for 2015 which was $\$606,638.10$ in permit value and 62 permits issues.  The Increase in value of housing permits will be measured annually with the first measurement occurring in December 2017. The Division of Planning and Development is responsible for this measurement.  

Per Shelby County Code Enforcement, there were 25 Housing building permits issued for rehabilitation and new construction in 2017 within the Millington Community. These permits totaled $\$1,453,452,73$ .  While the number of permits in 2017 were down from the baseline in 2015, the value of the permits issued more than doubled in 2017 (from $\$606,618.10$ in 2016 to $\$1$ ,453,062.23).  The next measurement will be documented in December 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>$ value of redevelopment 0</td><td>606638/15000</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-04-3  

<html><body><table><tr><td>Activity Title:</td><td colspan="2">Big Creek OV -Tree Mitigation</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR - Environmental Value</td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="2">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022</td></tr><tr><td>Benefit Type: （)</td><td colspan="2">Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization: Shelby County Government2</td></tr><tr><td>Overall</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31, 2018</td><td>To Date</td></tr><tr><td>Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>N/A</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

Tree mitigation will take place over 400 acres of land to insure that there is no loss of the tree canopy due to the overall development of the Big Creek Project.  The baseline for this value is 0 in that no trees have been removed from the project area.  The planting acreage will be measured annually with the first measurement occuring in December 2017.  Shelby County Public Works is responsible for this measurement.  

# Location Description:  

The Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy Road on the West. Tree mitigation will occur throughout the Millington community to insure that there is no loss to the overall tree canopy.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

Tree mitigation will take place over 400 acres of land to insure there is no loss of the tree canopy due to the overall development of the Big Creek Project. The baseline for this value is 0 in that no trees have been removed from the project area. The planting acreage will be measured annually with the first measurement occurring in December 2017.  Shelby County Public Works is responsible for this measurement.  

During 2017, no tree planting occurred.  At this time, no trees have been lost due NDR projects and the actual tree planting activity is being rolled into the environmental review and design which is under way for the Big Creek Project.  The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Accomplishments Performance Measures</td></tr><tr><td>This Report Period</td><td>Cumulative Actual Total / Expected</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td># acres successfully reforested 0</td><td>0/400</td></tr></table></body></html>  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  

# Grantee Activity Number: 8-OV-04-4  

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">Activity Title: Big Creek OV - Decreased Flood Damage</td></tr><tr><td colspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>Activitiy Category:</td><td colspan="2">Activity Status:</td></tr><tr><td>NDR- Resilience Value</td><td colspan="2">Planned</td></tr><tr><td>Project Number:</td><td colspan="2">Project Title:</td></tr><tr><td>8-OV</td><td colspan="2">Outcome Values - OV</td></tr><tr><td>Projected Start Date:</td><td colspan="2">Projected End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>12/21/2016 Benefit Type:</td><td colspan="2">06/15/2022 Completed Activity Actual End Date:</td></tr><tr><td>（) National Objective: NA</td><td colspan="2">Responsible Organization:</td></tr><tr><td></td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>Overall Total Projected Budget from All Sources</td><td>Jan 1 thru Mar 31,2018 N/A</td><td>To Date $0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Budget</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total Obligated</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Funds Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Drawdown</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Program Income Received</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Total Funds Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Shelby County Government2</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Most Impacted and Distressed Expended</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td>Match Contributed</td><td>$0.00</td><td>$0.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>  

# Activity Description:  

This outcome value estimates that upon completion of the project Millington can avoid an anticipated $\$60,000,000$ in flood damage costs and reduce its flood pump operation hours by $20\%$ over the 2010 and 2011 damage.  The baseline is a total of $\$233$ million in damages and 20 hours of flood pump operation.  While this cannot truly be assessed until the project is complete and a comparable flood occurs, these metrics will be monitored annually with the first occuring in December 2017.  

# Location Description:  

The Big Creek Watershed in Millington, TN from the Naval Support Activity Base on the East along Paul Barrett Parkway to Navy Road on the West. Tree evaluation will occur throughout the Millington community.  

# Activity Progress Narrative:  

This outcome value estimates that upon completion of the project Millington can avoid an anticipated $\$60,000,000$ in flood damage costs and reduce its flood pump operation hours by $20\%$ over the 2010 and 2011 damage. The baseline is a total of $\$233$ million in damages and 20 hours of flood pump operation. While this cannot truly be assessed until the project is complete and a comparable flood occurs.  These metrics will be monitored annually with the first occurring in December 2017. During 2017 Millington experienced no flooding due to disasters.  This resulted in no measurement for loss due to flood damage or the operation of the flood pumps to address flooding issues in the community.  The next measure will occur in December of 2018.  

# Accomplishments Performance Measures  

This Report Period Total  

Cumulative Actual Total / Expected Total 233000000/60  

$\$9$ estimated value of flood loss  

Beneficiaries Performance Measures No Beneficiaries Performance Measures found.  

Activity Locations No Activity Locations found.  

# Other Funding Sources Budgeted - Detail No Other Match Funding Sources Found  

Amount  

Other Funding Sources No Other Funding Sources Found Total Other Funding Sources  